# Project 1: Comparison of variant callers
In this project you will compare three widely used variant callers: BCFtools, FreeBayes and GATK using a 50 Mb region from human chr6.

You will
Run the three variant callers on the same dataset
Compare the number of SNPs and indels identified
Assess callset quality using transition/transversion (ts/tv) ratios
Compare raw and filtered callsets
Identify shared and private variants using bcftools isec
Interpret how filtering and caller choice affect variant discovery
Data download
You will use two iPS cell lineages kolf and kolf_2 from the HipSci project. Download a tarball with the scripts https://tinyurl.com/y3srttso and unpack and prepare the data as follows


Let us look into the data


Inside the folder you will have the reference fasta file (.fa) with its corresponding index (.fai) and dictionary (.dict) files. And two bam files with their index file (.bai)

Variant calling tools to be used
bcftools mpileup
freebayes
GATK HaplotypeCaller

All the tools should be installed. Otherwise run “./download.sh conda” step.
Tasks
Task 1: Run the three variant callers (should take 20 - 25min):

Explanations for bcftools: The code “bcftools mpileup” outputs values for all positions (similar to gvcf) – see below.

 Therefore, we pipe the output to “bcftools call” to extract only the variants.

bcftools mpileup used command line information

bcftools call used command line information

Explanations for bcftools: The output of freebayes is an uncompressed vcf files. So we pipe the output to “bcftools view” to generate the compressed vcf file.

Explanations for gatk:

Task 2: Create stats for the raw callsets, note the number of SNPs, indels, and ts/tv ratio.



Task 3: Filter the calls, require QUAL>20 and note the number of SNPs, indels and ts/tv of the filtered callset. Can you explain the differences, especially the GATK tool?



The number of SNPs and indels reduces and TS/TV ratio improves with QUAL>20 indicating a higher quality filtered whole-genome calls.

GATK outputs are unchanged because it already filters for QUAL ≥ 30 by default. You can fact check this via GATK HaplotypeCaller documentation or check the VCF directly:



Task 4: Use the command bcftools isec on the to find variants with QUAL>20 called by all three tools (presumably the highest-confidence calls). Explore the output. What is the ts/tv of variants in the intersection?


The TS/TV ratios are between 2.25 - 2.29.

Explanation:
The flag -c (collapse) is how to match variants across files. -c all says match any variant at the same POS regardless of ALT alleles
The flag -n (number of files) says which variants to output based on how many files they appear in. -n =3 means exactly in 3 files (i.e. all callers)
Looking inside isec_all/ shows three vcf files which have the exact same number of variants inside each file.



Task 5: The variants called by one program only (presumably enriched for errors). What is the ts/tv of variants private to the callers?


The values for the variants private to each callers are 2.12 (bcftools), 2.01 (freebayes) and 1.66 (GATK).

Explanation:  -n =1 means exactly in 1 file (i.e. private to one of the caller)
